# Skyrmions

Skyrmions are topological excitations, that were originally proposed by Skyrme to describe particles (hadrons). In the paper Scientific Reports 5, 7692 (2015) (http://www.nature.com/articles/srep07692), we proposed to create skyrmion excitations in a quantum emulator of ultracold atoms that are in the superfluid state and have an order parameter of non-trivial topology. The system is described in detail in the text.

How to use the code:

The code consists of three parts: 

(1) Initialization using a MATLAB routine, found in the folder 'initialization'. One can set up the system parameters (temperature, number of lattice sites etc.) in initializeGPE.m, and then run the function initializeGPE(filenameBase), where the string filenameBase should contain the name base of the files.

This routine generates three files: 
- filenameBase_[...]_Filenames: contains the name of some files that the C++ simulation (2)
- filenameBase_[...]_SystemParameters: contains all parameters of the system, that are read by the 
- filenameBase_[...]_RunFile: runfile for running the simulation on the cluster
The beginning of the files '[...]' is set up by this routine, and contains some of the relevant parameters (see paper).

(2) C++ solver that calculates the ground state of the skyrmion in the topologically non-trivial state. This part of the code can be found in the main folder.
The code can be compiled using the makefile that is provided, producing the executable 'imagTimeGPESolver'. 

The simulation can be run as './imagTimeGPESolver filenameBase_[...]_SystemParameters'.

The output files generated by the simulation contain the physical observables as a data file. They can be processed by the visualization tool (3).

(3) Visualization of the results using a MATLAB window that plots all relevant physical results. The control panel can be started by clicking on the 'SkyrmionsControlPanel.fig' file. One can set up the path to the control panel to the file containing the simulation results. The radio buttons allow one to set up the parameters of the plot, and then plot the results or save them. See a screenshot on control_panel.png.


-----------------


About the simulation: this is a C++ code and uses OpenMP to parallelize the results accross many cores. The simulation minimizes the energy function of the system, whose input parameters is a complex 3-vector (superfluid density, Psi) in 3D space. We often had 128 lattice sites in each direction, therefore the minimization had to be performed in 3x128x128x128 dimensional space. The minimization was carried out using an imaginary time evolution process, making the energy converge into a local minimum. We were deliberately looking for the local minimum and not the global one, since we were interested in these solutions, that have neat structure. 

The time evolution used a 4th order Runge-Kutta method (so-called 4KIP method, see http://quantum.otago.ac.nz/quantum-science-otago.html). The time evolution was governed by the derivative of the energy function: dPsi / dt = -dE / dPsi, where E is the energy of the system. The energy consists of two parts E = K + I: a kinetic energy (K) and an interaction energy (I). The interaction energy is more easily calculated in real space, whereas the kinetic energy in Fourier space. Therefore, at each time step, we performed a Fourier transform to calculate the derivative of the energy. 

Another algorithmic improvement was that we made use of the rotation symmetry of Psi to simplify the calculation of the interaction energy. Instead of 3 complex parameters, it turned out to depend only on 2 real parameters. This made possible for us to use spline interpolation in this 2 parameter space to determine the Psi dependence of the interaction energy. Since the interaction energy is a quite complicated object, not having to calculate it gave us large gains in run-time.
